UN climate conference 'must go ahead' despite calls for postponement due to Covid-19, official says
London (CNN)The president of the UN climate change conference insisted Tuesday that the event scheduled for November in Glasgow "must go ahead in person," after a network of 1,500 civil society groups called for the negotiations to be postponed.
The Climate Action Network (CAN), which includes groups from more than 130 countries, argued that the failure to provide vaccines to millions of people in poor countries, as well as the high costs of travel and accommodation, has made it impossible to ensure the COP26 talks will be "safe, inclusive and just."
"Our concern is that those countries most deeply affected by the climate crisis and those countries suffering from the lack of support by rich nations in providing vaccines will be left out and be conspicuous by their absence at COP26," said Climate Action Network Executive Director Tasneem Essop in a statement.
"There has always been an inherent power imbalance within the UN climate talks and this is now compounded by the health crisis," Essop wrote. "Looking at the current timeline for COP26, it is difficult to imagine there can be fair participation from the Global South under safe conditions and it should therefore be postponed."
CAN also expressed concern about the exclusion of delegates, journalists and civil society groups from the UK's coronavirus red-list countries. People who have been in red-list countries within 10 days before arriving to the UK are banned from entering the country.
Some countries on the red list are among the most vulnerable to climate change, including the Maldives and Bangladesh.
COP26 President Alok Sharma, a British MP, responded on Twitter and pointed to the UK government's steps to ensure delegates are offered vaccines, and that those from red-list countries are accommodated.
"Climate change has not taken time off, which is why #COP26 must go ahead in person in November," he wrote on Twitter. "The UK is funding quarantine hotels for accredited delegates from red list countries. This is in addition to our vaccines offer to ensure an inclusive, accessible & covid-secure summit."
Sharma is currently in China, where he has been discussing "goals" for the talks, he said in a separate Twitter post.
CAN said that promises by the UK of fast-track vaccines have not been met, and that many delegates have not received their first shots. Most vaccines require two shots and are typically spaced out by around least eight weeks. Talks are now just two months away.
"Repeated requests to the UK Presidency for clarity around support for logistics and quarantine costs have also not been forthcoming or been made public causing uncertainty and anxiety," CAN's statement reads.
The Glasgow talks are seen as crucial as scientists warn that the world needs to dramatically reduce fossil fuel emissions over the next decade to have any chance of limiting global warming to 1.5 degrees Celsius above pre-industrial levels. Global warming of 2 degrees Celsius would result in significant global changes, including more frequent and intense extreme weather events, with some ecosystems passing critical tipping points.
If COP26 goes ahead, it would be one of the largest in-person international events held since the outbreak of Covid-19.


Democrats' free tuition plan could save community colleges at a critical time
(CNN)Democrats, following the lead of President Joe Biden, are planning to include free community college in a massive spending plan that party leaders are hoping to pass by the end of the month -- and such a major federal investment could provide a much-needed jolt to the nation's two-year colleges after they saw a huge drop in enrollment due to the pandemic.
Enrollment at community colleges fell nearly 10%, or by 476,000 fewer students, last spring compared to the year before. The Covid pandemic disproportionately affected typical community college students -- parents, first-generation and lower-income students who hold jobs in addition to taking classes.
In previous economic downturns, more people went to community college seeking better job opportunities and enrollment peaked after the Great Recession. But this time, juggling childcare, remote learning challenges and the shifting restrictions on businesses in food and hospitality industries created too many hurdles.
"If there was ever a case for free community college, Covid certainly ripped the band-aid off and made that clear," said Karen Stout, president of Achieving the Dream, a nonprofit that works with community colleges to improve access for low-income students and students of color.
It's too early to tell whether enrollment increased this fall across the country, though it's unlikely to fully recover to pre-pandemic levels. But many community colleges are making changes to try to bring students back, Stout added.
Some have shortened academic terms and have classes starting at various times, giving students the flexibility they may need when work and child care schedules are disrupted. Other colleges are aiming to strengthen relationships with high schools, a connection that may have weakened last year as schools turned to virtual and hybrid learning.
Community college is already free in some states
Making community college free is not a new idea. Former President Barack Obama made a splash when he proposed it in 2015. It never happened on a federal level, but several red and blue states, as well as cities, have enacted some version of a tuition-free law -- including New York, Oregon, Tennessee and Rhode Island.
Policy details -- concerning who's eligible and what costs are covered -- vary drastically from state to state, and so do the outcomes.
In some cases, the program works like a scholarship and covers the students' remaining tuition and fees after using other financial aid grants they may have received. That means that a free tuition program may cover little of the actual cost for very low-income students who are already eligible for a Pell grant equal to the the price of tuition. Still, there is evidence that those programs, like the one in Tennessee, still lead to an increase in enrollment.
"There's power in the message that tuition is free. Figuring out how much college costs is complicated," said Laura Perna, a professor of education at the University of Pennsylvania.
It's unclear how exactly a federal free tuition program would work in conjunction with existing state and local programs. But policy experts say that pairing it with a bigger Pell Grant, which can be used to cover additional costs like housing and books, would go a long way to helping lower-income students.
What are the chances of this passing Congress?
The budget framework put forth by Senate Democrats calls for making tuition free at the nation's community colleges as well as increasing the Pell Grant for low-income students, providing money to help institution's increase their student completion rate, and investing more funds in historically black, tribal and minority serving colleges.
The resolution that passed by both the Senate and House this summer is not a bill but a framework that includes a set of instructions for congressional committees, allowing them to write legislation totaling as much as $3.5 trillion. Lawmakers are currently working on drafting the text -- which could also include money for universal pre-K, extending the recent expansion of the child tax credit, and funds to combat climate change, to name a few.
The final package is expected to be considered under reconciliation, which means it can be passed with 50 Democratic votes alone in the Senate without any Republican support.
But it remains uncertain whether all Democrats are in support of the legislation. Moderate members of the party, including West Virginia Sen. Joe Manchin, has long been skeptical of the price tag of the spending bill. This week also asked his colleagues to "hit a strategic pause" on the legislation -- throwing a wrench into the party's plan to pass it by the end of September. Arizona Sen. Kyrsten Sinema has also said she doesn't support the size of the proposal.

Biden on Hurricane Ida relief efforts: 'We're not going home til this gets done'
Washington (CNN)President Joe Biden on Tuesday pledged his administration's full support in Hurricane Ida relief efforts and made his case for using his infrastructure plan to take immediate action to address the effects of the climate crisis.

"My message to everyone grappling with this devastation is: We're here. We're not going home til this gets done. I really mean that. We're not leaving. We're going to continue to shout as long as it takes to get real progress here, folks," Biden said after touring damage caused by the hurricane in Queens, New York.
The President continued: "And we have to take some bold action now to tackle the accelerating effects of climate."
"Folks, the evidence is clear: Climate change poses an existential threat to our lives, to our economy, and the threat is here. It's not going to get any better," Biden said. "The question is, can it get worse? We can stop it from getting worse."
The President again pitched his sweeping infrastructure plan, which he argues would better protect the nation from future extreme weather events and cut emissions.
"We've got to listen to the scientists and the economists, and the national security experts: They all tell us this is code red. The nation and the world are in peril," the President added. "That's not hyperbole. That is a fact."
He continued: "They've been warning us the extreme weather would get more extreme over the decade, and we're living it in real time now. We can look around the wreckage and the ruins and the heartbreak from so many communities to feel it. You don't understand, you can feel it, you can taste it, you can see it."
Biden said he believed the recent extreme weather events across the country, including deadly wildfires in the West, were causing even climate skeptics to see "that this really does matter."
"People are beginning to realize this is much, much bigger than anyone was willing to believe," Biden said.
The President thanked local leaders, including Senate Majority Leader Chuck Schumer, for their work in mobilizing and coordinating relief efforts. He said the Federal Emergency Management Agency was working intensely with state and local officials to assess damage and mobilize resources.
The President said Health and Human Services Secretary Xavier Becerra was working with the state of New York to ensure those on Medicare and Medicaid get the emergency care they need.
"They're going to make sure it's equitable so that the hardest hit, including lower-income folks, communities of color and the elderly and the most vulnerable get help and get it first. They are the ones in the greatest need," Biden said.
Earlier in the day, Biden was in New Jersey to receive a briefing on the hurricane damage and described it as "profound." He called this moment an inflection point for doing something about climate change.
"You really took a hit," Biden told the local officials of Hurricane Ida, expressing his condolences and thanking first responders for their courage.
After Ida made its way through Louisiana and Mississippi, its remnants -- a tropical depression -- led to heavy rain, flooding and tornadoes along the northeast.
In addition to the 13 storm-related deaths in Louisiana, there have been at least 50 storm-related deaths in the Northeast, spanning Connecticut, Maryland, New York, New Jersey, Pennsylvania and Virginia. Biden has approved disaster declarations for New Jersey and New York.
Of the dozens killed in the East, many died in flooded homes -- including many in flooded basements -- or while overtaken by water in or outside their vehicles.
The visit marks the President's second trip in the span of a week to survey damage brought by the storm. On Friday, Biden visited several sites in Louisiana, which included meetings on disaster response and touring neighborhoods ravaged by the hurricane.
After it swept out of the Gulf and into the Northeast, the rains from Ida wreaked havoc. Major interstates across the Northeast flooded. Water rushed into a number of New York City subway stations, and more than 800 subway riders had to be evacuated. As of Monday, nearly half a million businesses and homes in Louisiana remained without power, according to PowerOutage.US.
Biden also made the case for more climate-resilient infrastructure during his visit to Louisiana, pointing to his proposals to Congress.
"Things have changed so drastically in terms of the environment. We've already crossed certain thresholds. We can't build back roads, highways, bridges, anything to what it was before. We gotta build back to what it is now, what's needed now," Biden said on Friday. "And I know the heads of the energy companies understand this really well. We have a significant piece of legislation, both the infrastructure bill and a budget thing, a reconciliation bill, that calls for significant investment in being able to deal with what is about to come."
And state and local leaders are sounding an urgent alarm on climate change and calling for action on infrastructure legislation so states can be better prepared for extreme weather events in the future.
"We haven't experienced this before, but we should expect it the next time, and that means we have to continue investments in infrastructure, working in partnership with our federal government, and support from (New York Democratic) Senator (Chuck) Schumer and President Biden," New York Gov. Kathy Hochul said.
The rainfall from Ida broke a record in New York City that had been set just one week earlier, something Mayor Bill de Blasio said is "the biggest wake-up call we could possibly get."
The trip to the Northeast also comes as Biden contends with multiple crises, including a worsening Covid-19 pandemic, renewed concerns about America's economic recovery thanks to the latest jobs report, a potential wrench in his infrastructure and spending proposal, fallout from the US withdrawal from Afghanistan and Texas' new abortion restrictions.